---
title: "⚖️ The Importance of Privacy and Fairness in Machine Learning"
published: 2025-01-26
description: "Investigating the impact of unfairness mitigation techniques on privacy preserving Machine Learning."
image: ""
tags: [ML]
category: "cs-learnings"
draft: false
lang: "en"
---

As our reliance on data and machine learning decision systems continues to increase, we have a responsibility to ensure that the models we train guarantee individual privacy and do not exacerbate existing social disparities and unfair judgements. Privacy and fairness have been discussed more and more as the topic of ethics in artificial intelligence (AI) has gained prominence, however they are oven covered as distinct topics. Both privacy and fairness strive to protect the rights of users and subjects of software systems, and more often than not, work in tandem with each other. Privacy may be defined as 'The condition of not having undocumented personal knowledge about one possessed by others' Dwork and Roth (2014). Fairness has always been a more complicated notion to define, especially in the realm of computer science. Fairness, with regards to the law, is ’seeking to treat people justly on an individual basis with regards to the use of information regarding them’. Algorithmic fairness stipulates that ’A person’s experience with an information system should not irrelevantly depend on their personal characteristics’ Ekstrand et al. (2018). We measure an AI system’s fairness based on its impact on people and the harm it may cause. Allocation harms occur when a system makes decisions, for example, to assign loans. A quality of service harm occurs when a system works differently for one group of people vs another.

When the fairness of a model is not considered or perhaps even taken for granted, there is an important risk that people may be negatively impacted and harmed. Cases of allocation harms and quality of service harms have been recently documented in the case of software systems. In 2018, commercially available facial recognition programs by major technology companies like IBM and Microsoft were recorded as demonstrating skin-type and gender-type biases, with far greater error rates when trying to determine the gender of darker-skinned women than light-skinned men. The effect of unfair systems can be even more sinister when applied to the context of the judiciary and criminal system. In 2016, a study showed that a software program used to predict a defendant’s likelihood of re-offending by giving them a score from 1 (low risk) to 10 (high risk) was more likely to allocate a low number to a white defendant. Black defendants were almost twice as likely as white defendants to be labelled as higher risk but not actually re-offend. If we are trusting automated decisions to make decisions that impact people’s lives, we have a responsibility to ensure that they treat all people fairly.

Whilst the importance of fairness and fair automated systems has only recently become more apparent, a large portion of the general public has always been concerned about the privacy risks associated with data leakage and data usage. Especially in cases where automated systems are trusted with sensitive data, such as health records, it is important that we prevent personal information from being misused, from being used for tasks the user has not expected or explicitly consented to, and from falling into the wrong hands, perhaps due to hacks.This last point is particularly pertinent in the case of machine learning where we want to ensure training data privacy, and guarantee that a malicious actor will not be able to reverse engineer our model to access our training 2data, or infer any information about our training data from the predictions made by our models.

Both privacy and fairness search to protect people from exploitation, and we should be looking to ensure that future machine learning systems do not disenfranchise any group for any reason. However, existing work by Cummings et al. (2019) has asked if it is currently possible to guarantee the privacy of training data, fairness of predictions made by a model, and reasonable overall accuracy, concluded that it is possible to satisfy only two of these three criteria. Their findings force us to ask the question, if none of the current, existing algorithms and models used today to make decisions and allocate resources are fair, private and accurate, which conditions are being prioritised and which are being ignored. Furthermore, who ends up suffering from these shortcomings? More often than not, work by Farrand et al. (2020) reveals that minority subgroups of data suffer more utility loss compared to others. When it comes to accuracy, the less represented groups which already achieve lower accuracy, end up losing more utility: the poor become poorer. In addition, as stricter privacy guarantees are imposed, this gap gets wider. This gap can have hugely significant societal and economic implications for people in all areas.

::github{repo="raphaelletseng/fairlearn-pytorch"}

_19th Nov 2021_ - Edited note: I used the terms 'unfairness mitigation' and 'bias mitigation' interchangably in this report. I think the correct term should be 'unfairness mitigation'. In the paper [The Myth of Complete AI-Fairness](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2104.12544.pdf), Virginia Dignum makes the point that not all bias is bad, and bias in human data is impossible to fully eliminate. **"Bias is not the problem,"** they write, **"prejudice and discrimination are."**

> "Whereas prejudice represents a preconceived judgment or attitude, discrimination is a behaviour. In society, discrimination is often enacted through institutional structures and policies, and embedded in cultural beliefs and representations, and is thus reflected in any data collected. The focus need be on using AI to support interventions aimed at reducing prejudice and discrimination, e.g. through education, facilitation of intergroup contact, targeting social norms promoting positive relations between groups, or supporting people identify their own bias and prejudices."

<iframe src="/assets/pdfs/privacy_fairness_Report.pdf" width = "100%" height = "750px"> </iframe>
